docs: add incremental hydration guide (#58671)
angular/angular: adev/src/content/guide/incremental-hydration.md

# Incremental Hydration

## What is incremental hydration

Incremental hydration is an advanced type of [hydration](guide/hydration) that enables leaving sections of an application dehydrated and incrementally triggering hydration of those sections as they are needed. Incremental hydration is currently in [developer preview](/reference/releases#developer-preview).

## Why use incremental hydration?

Incremental hydration is a performance improvement that builds on top of full application hydration. It creates smaller initial bundle sizes while still providing the end user an experience that is comparable to a full application hydration experience. The benefits include faster initial load times, reducing First Input Delay ([FID](https://web.dev/fid/)), improved Cumulative Layout Shift ([CLS](https://web.dev/cls/)), and allows users the ability to use deferrable views for content that may not have been deferrable before. Improving these numbers will affect things like SEO performance.

## How do you enable incremental hydration in Angular?

> Incremental hydration can be enabled for server-side rendered (SSR) applications using hydration only. Follow the [Angular SSR Guide](guide/ssr) to enable server-side rendering and the [Angular Hydration Guide](guide/hydration) to enable hydration first.

Reviewer: > Incremental hydration can be enabled for server-side rendered (SSR) applications using hydration only.

Could we consider "Incremental hydration can only be enabled for server-side rendered (SSR) applications using hydration."

(the trailing only made it sound like you were saying for apps using only hydration as if there were other options)

Enable incremental hydration by adding the `withIncrementalHydration()` function to the `provideClientHydration` provider.

```typescript
import {
  bootstrapApplication,
  provideClientHydration,
  withIncrementalHydration,
} from '@angular/platform-browser';
...

bootstrapApplication(AppComponent, {
  providers: [provideClientHydration(withIncrementalHydration())]
});
```

> NOTE: Incremental Hydration depends on and enables event replay under the hood. If you already have `withEventReplay()` in your list, you can safely remove it after enabling incremental hydration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Incremental hydration requires [event replay](guide/hydration#capturing-and-replaying-events). Adding `withIncrementalHydration()` automatically enables event replay, so you can safely remove `withEventReplay()`.
```

* This makes sense as a normal paragraph rather than a callout
* we generally want to avoid idioms like "under the hood"

Author: What about "under the bonnet"? ;)

> NOTE: Incremental Hydration depends on and enables event replay under the hood. If you already have `withEventReplay()` in your list, you can safely remove it after enabling incremental hydration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: Incremental Hydration depends on and enables event replay under the hood. If you already have `withEventReplay()` in your list, you can safely remove it after enabling incremental hydration.
```
title case note will enable the callout to be rendered properly

## How does incremental hydration work?

> Incremental hydration is built on top of full-application [hydration](guide/hydration), [deferrable views](guide/defer), and [event replay](guide/hydration#capturing-and-replaying-events) and allows users to add additional triggers to defer blocks that specify they will be incremental hydration boundaries. Adding a `hydrate` trigger to a defer block indicates to Angular that it should trigger loading that defer block's dependencies during server side rendering and render the main template rather than the `@placeholder` template. On the client side, the dependencies are still deferred, and the defer block content is left dehydrated until that `hydrate` trigger fires. That trigger results in a defer block fetching its dependencies and hydrating the content. Any browser events triggered by the end user prior to hydration are queued up and replayed once the hydration process is complete.

Reviewer 3: nit: in the "Any browser events triggered by the end user prior to hydration ... " sentence, we can specify that we capture and replay events that match registered listeners in corresponding component templates.

> Incremental hydration is built on top of full-application [hydration](guide/hydration), [deferrable views](guide/defer), and [event replay](guide/hydration#capturing-and-replaying-events) and allows users to add additional triggers to defer blocks that specify they will be incremental hydration boundaries. Adding a `hydrate` trigger to a defer block indicates to Angular that it should trigger loading that defer block's dependencies during server side rendering and render the main template rather than the `@placeholder` template. On the client side, the dependencies are still deferred, and the defer block content is left dehydrated until that `hydrate` trigger fires. That trigger results in a defer block fetching its dependencies and hydrating the content. Any browser events triggered by the end user prior to hydration are queued up and replayed once the hydration process is complete.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Incremental hydration builds on top of full-application [hydration](guide/hydration), [deferrable views](guide/defer), and [event replay](guide/hydration#capturing-and-replaying-events). With incremental hydration, you can add additional triggers to `@defer` blocks that define incremental hydration boundaries. Adding a `hydrate` trigger to a defer block tells Angular that it should load that defer block's dependencies during server-side rendering and render the main template rather than the `@placeholder`. When client-side rendering, the dependencies are still deferred, and the defer block content stays dehydrated until its `hydrate` trigger fires. That trigger tells the defer block to fetch its dependencies and hydrate the content. Any browser events triggered by the end user prior to hydration are queued up and replayed once the hydration process is complete.
```

> Incremental hydration is built on top of full-application [hydration](guide/hydration), [deferrable views](guide/defer), and [event replay](guide/hydration#capturing-and-replaying-events) and allows users to add additional triggers to defer blocks that specify they will be incremental hydration boundaries. Adding a `hydrate` trigger to a defer block indicates to Angular that it should trigger loading that defer block's dependencies during server side rendering and render the main template rather than the `@placeholder` template. On the client side, the dependencies are still deferred, and the defer block content is left dehydrated until that `hydrate` trigger fires. That trigger results in a defer block fetching its dependencies and hydrating the content. Any browser events triggered by the end user prior to hydration are queued up and replayed once the hydration process is complete.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Incremental hydration is built on top of full-application [hydration](guide/hydration), [deferrable views](guide/defer), and [event replay](guide/hydration#capturing-and-replaying-events). It allows users to add additional triggers to defer blocks that specify they will be incremental hydration boundaries. Adding a `hydrate` trigger to a defer block indicates to Angular that it should trigger loading that defer block's dependencies during server side rendering and render the main template rather than the `@placeholder` template. On the client side, the dependencies are still deferred, and the defer block content is left dehydrated until that `hydrate` trigger fires. That trigger results in a defer block fetching its dependencies and hydrating the content. Any browser events triggered by the end user prior to hydration are queued up and replayed once the hydration process is complete.
```

My suggestion is to break that first sentence into two sentences to make it a bit easier to process.

> ## Controlling hydration of content with triggers

Reviewer 3: I'd propose adding a note somewhere in this guide to mention that the `hydrate` triggers do not replace regular triggers and may be give an example of a behavior with different regular and `hydrate` triggers.

Author: I've added a new section to cover this.

You can specify **hydrate triggers** that control when Angular loads and hydrates deferred content.

> Multiple hydrate event triggers can be defined by separating them with a semicolon, `;` and will be evaluated as OR conditions.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Multiple hydrate event triggers can be defined by separating them with a semicolon `;` and will be evaluated as OR conditions.
```

> Multiple hydrate event triggers can be defined by separating them with a semicolon, `;` and will be evaluated as OR conditions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Each `@defer` block may have multiple hydrate event triggers, separated with a semicolon (`;`). Angular triggers hydration when _any_ of the triggers fire.
```

`hydrate on` specifies a condition for when hydration is triggered for the `@defer` block.

The available triggers are as follows:

| Trigger                                             | Description                                                            |
| --------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| [`hydrate on idle`](#hydrate-on-idle)               | Triggers when the browser is idle.                                     |
| [`hydrate on viewport`](#hydrate-on-viewport)       | Triggers when specified content enters the viewport                    |
| [`hydrate on interaction`](#hydrate-on-interaction) | Triggers when the user interacts with specified element                |
| [`hydrate on hover`](#hydrate-on-hover)             | Triggers when the mouse hovers over specified area                     |
| [`hydrate on immediate`](#hydrate-on-immediate)     | Triggers immediately after non-deferred content has finished rendering |
| [`hydrate on timer`](#hydrate-on-timer)             | Triggers after a specific duration                                     |

#### `hydrate on idle`

> The `hydrate on idle` trigger loads the deferrable view's dependencies and hydrates the content once the browser has reached an idle state, based on requestIdleCallback.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `hydrate on idle` trigger loads the deferrable view's dependencies and hydrates the content once the browser has reached an idle state, based on `requestIdleCallback`.
```

```angular-html
<!-- @defer (hydrate on idle) -->

> @defer {

Reviewer 3: Should we use `@defer (hydrate on idle)` here in the main example code (and remove the comment)?

  <large-cmp />
} @placeholder {
  <div>Large component placeholder</div>
}
```

#### `hydrate on viewport`

> The `hydrate on viewport` trigger loads the deferrable view's dependencies and hydrates the content when the specified content enters the viewport using the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `hydrate on viewport` trigger loads the deferrable view's dependencies and hydrates corresponding page of the app when the specified content enters the viewport using the
```
We can also mention what "specified content" means, i.e. that it's the rendered content of the `<large-cmp />` component.

```angular-html
@defer (hydrate on hover) {
  <large-cmp />
} @placeholder {
  <div>Large component placeholder</div>
}
```

#### `hydrate on immediate`

The `hydrate on immediate` trigger loads the deferrable view's dependencies and hydrates the content immediately. This means that the deferred block loads as soon
as all other non-deferred content has finished rendering.

```angular-html
@defer (hydrate on immediate) {
  <large-cmp />
} @placeholder {
  <div>Large component placeholder</div>
}
```

#### `hydrate on timer`

The `hydrate on timer` trigger loads the deferrable view's dependencies and hydrates the content after a specified duration.

```angular-html
@defer (hydrate on timer(500ms)) {
  <large-cmp />
} @placeholder {
  <div>Large component placeholder</div>
}
```

The duration parameter must be specified in milliseconds (`ms`) or seconds (`s`).

### `hydrate when`

The `hydrate when` trigger accepts a custom conditional expression and loads the deferrable view's dependencies and hydrates the content when the
condition becomes truthy.

```angular-html
@defer (hydrate when condition) {
  <large-cmp />
} @placeholder {
  <div>Large component placeholder</div>
}
```

> NOTE: `hydrate when` conditions will only trigger when they are the top-most dehydrated `@defer` block. The condition provided for the trigger is

Author: As a follow up, we should add a diagram for this.

> NOTE: `hydrate when` conditions will only trigger when they are the top-most dehydrated `@defer` block. The condition provided for the trigger is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NOTE: `hydrate when` conditions only trigger when they are the top-most dehydrated `@defer` block. The condition provided for the trigger is
```

here and elsewhere: docs should always be in present tense, so we want to avoid saying "will" in most cases

> specified in the parent component, which needs to exist before it can be triggered. If the parent block is dehydrated, that expression will not yet
> exist.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
specified in the parent component, which needs to exist before it can be triggered. If the parent block is dehydrated, that expression will not yet
be resolvable by Angular.
```

### `hydrate never`

The `hydrate never` allows users to specify that the content in the defer block should remain dehydrated indefinitely, effectively becoming static
content. Note that this applies to the initial render only. During a subsequent client-side render, a `@defer` block with `hydrate never` would
still fetch dependencies, as hydration only applies to initial load of server-side rendered content.

```angular-html

> @defer (hydrate never) {

Reviewer 3: I'd propose adding an extra regular trigger into this example, e.g.
```suggestion
@defer (on viewport; hydrate never) {
```
and mention that for subsequent navigations, the block would be triggered based on the "on viewport" condition.

  <large-cmp />
} @placeholder {
  <div>Large component placeholder</div>
}
```

> NOTE: Using `hydrate never` prevents hydration of the entire nested subtree of a given `@defer` block. No other `hydrate` triggers will fire for content nested underneath that block.

Author: As a follow up, we should add a diagram for this.

## How does incremental hydration work with nested `@defer` blocks?

Angular's component and dependency system is hierarchical, which means hydrating any component requires all of its parents also be hydrated. So if hydration is triggered for a child `@defer` block of a nested set of dehydrated `@defer` blocks, hydration will be triggered from the top-most dehydrated `@defer` block down to the triggered child and will fire in that order.

```angular-html
@defer (hydrate on interaction) {

>   <h1>This is parent content</h1>
>   @defer (hydrate on hover) {
>     <large-cmp />
>   } @placeholder {
>     <div>child placeholder</div>
>   }

Reviewer 3: nit: we can use component names as an extra documentation:
```suggestion
  <parent-block-cmp />
  @defer (hydrate on hover) {
    <child-block-cmp />
  } @placeholder {
    <div>Child placeholder</div>
  }
```

} @placeholder{
  <div>Parent Placeholder</div>
}
```

> In the above example, hovering over the nested `@defer` block would trigger hydration. The parent `@defer` block with the `<h1>This is parent content</h1>` would hydrate first, then the child `@defer` block with `<large-cmp />` would hydrate after.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the above example, hovering over the nested `@defer` block triggers hydration. The parent `@defer` block with the `<h1>This is parent content</h1>` hydrates first, then the child `@defer` block with `<large-cmp />` hydrates after.
```
